The Project Gutenberg eBook, Simple Sabotage Field Manual, by Strategic
Services

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Simple Sabotage Field Manual

Author: Strategic Services

Release Date: August 4, 2008  [eBook #26184]
[Most recently updated August 10, 2008]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIMPLE SABOTAGE FIELD MANUAL***


This eBook was prepared by David Reed.



Etext of Simple Sabotage Field Manual
Office of Strategic Services


SIMPLE SABOTAGE FIELD MANUAL
Strategic Services
(Provisional)
Prepared under direction of The Director of Strategic Services
OSS REPRODUCTION BRANCH
SIMPLE SABOTAGE FIELD MANUAL
Strategic Services
(Provisional)
STRATEGIC SERVICES FIELD MANUAL No. 3

Office of Strategic Services

Washington, D. C.

17 January 1944

This Simple Sabotage Field Manual Strategic Services (Provisional) is
published for the information and guidance of all concerned and will be
used as the basic doctrine for Strategic Services training for this
subject.

The contents of this Manual should be carefully controlled and should
not be allowed to come into unauthorized hands.

The instructions may be placed in separate pamphlets or leaflets
according to categories of operations but should be distributed with
care and not broadly. They should be used as a basis of radio broadcasts
only for local and special cases and as directed by the theater
commander.

AR 380-5, pertaining to handling of secret documents, will be complied
with in the handling of this Manual.

William J. Donovan

CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION
2. POSSIBLE EFFECTS
3. MOTIVATING THE SABOTEUR
4. TOOLS, TARGETS, AND TIMING
5. SPECIFIC SUGGESTIONS FOR SIMPLE SABOTAGE


1. INTRODUCTION

The purpose of this paper is to characterize simple sabotage, to outline
its possible effects, and to present suggestions for inciting and
executing it.

Sabotage varies from highly technical coup de main acts that require
detailed planning and the use of specially-trained operatives, to
innumerable simple acts which the ordinary individual citizen-saboteur
can perform. This paper is primarily concerned with the latter type.
Simple sabotage does not require specially prepared tools or equipment;
it is executed by an ordinary citizen who may or may not act
individually and without the necessity for active connection with an
organized group; and it is carried out in such a way as to involve a
minimum danger of injury, detection, and reprisal.

Where destruction is involved, the weapons of the citizen-saboteur are
salt, nails, candles, pebbles, thread, or any other materials he might
normally be expected to possess as a householder or as a worker in his
particular occupation. His arsenal is the kitchen shelf, the trash pile,
his own usual kit of tools and supplies. The targets of his sabotage are
usually objects to which he has normal and inconspicuous access in
everyday life.

A second type of simple sabotage requires no destructive tools
whatsoever and produces physical damage, if any, by highly indirect
means. It is based on universal opportunities to make faulty decisions,
to adopt a noncooperative attitude, and to induce others to follow suit.
Making a faulty decision may be simply a matter of placing tools in one
spot instead of another. A non-cooperative attitude may involve nothing
more than creating an unpleasant situation among one's fellow workers,
engaging in bickerings, or displaying surliness and stupidity.

This type of activity, sometimes referred to as the "human element," is
frequently responsible for accidents, delays, and general obstruction
even under normal conditions. The potential saboteur should discover
what types of faulty decisions and the operations are normally found in
this kind of work and should then devise his sabotage so as to enlarge
that "margin for error."

2. POSSIBLE EFFECTS

Acts of simple sabotage are occurring throughout Europe. An effort
should be made to add to their efficiency, lessen their detectability,
and increase their number. Acts of simple sabotage, multiplied by
thousands of citizen-saboteurs, can be an effective weapon against the
enemy.  Slashing tires, draining fuel tanks, starting fires, starting
arguments, acting stupidly, short-circuiting electric systems, abrading
machine parts will waste materials, manpower, and time. Occurring on a
wide scale, simple sabotage will be a constant and tangible drag on the
war effort of the enemy.

Simple sabotage may also have secondary results of more or less value.
Widespread practice of simple sabotage will harass and demoralize enemy
administrators and police. Further, success may embolden the
citizen-saboteur eventually to find colleagues who can assist him in
sabotage of greater dimensions. Finally, the very practice of simple
sabotage by natives in enemy or occupied territory may make these
individuals identify themselves actively with the United Nations war
effort, and encourage them to assist openly in periods of Allied
invasion and occupation.

3. MOTIVATING THE SABOTEUR

To incite the citizen to the active practice of simple sabotage and to
keep him practicing that sabotage over sustained periods is a special
problem.

Simple sabotage is often an act which the citizen performs according to
his own initiative and inclination. Acts of destruction do not bring him
any personal gain and may be completely foreign to his habitually
conservationist attitude toward materials and tools. Purposeful
stupidity is contrary to human nature. He frequently needs pressure,
stimulation or assurance, and information and suggestions regarding
feasible methods of simple sabotage.

(1) Personal Motives

(a) The ordinary citizen very probably has no immediate personal motive
for committing simple sabotage. Instead, he must be made to anticipate
indirect personal gain, such as might come with enemy evacuation or
destruction of the ruling government group. Gains should be stated as
specifically as possible for the area addressed: simple sabotage will
hasten the day when Commissioner X and his deputies Y and Z will be
thrown out, when particularly obnoxious decrees and restrictions will be
abolished, when food will arrive, and so on. Abstract verbalizations
about personal liberty, freedom of the press, and so on, will not be
convincing in most parts of the world. In many areas they will not even
be comprehensible.

(b) Since the effect of his own acts is limited, the saboteur may become
discouraged unless he feels that he is a member of a large, though
unseen, group of saboteurs operating against the enemy or the government
of his own country and elsewhere. This can be conveyed indirectly:
suggestions which he reads and hears can include observations that a
particular technique has been successful in this or that district. Even
if the technique is not applicable to his surroundings, another's
success will encourage him to attempt similar acts. It also can be
conveyed directly: statements praising the effectiveness of simple
sabotage can be contrived which will be published by white radio,
freedom stations, and the subversive press. Estimates of the proportion
of the population engaged in sabotage can be disseminated. Instances of
successful sabotage already are being broadcast by white radio and
freedom stations, and this should be continued and expanded where
compatible with security.

(c) More important than (a) or (b) would be to create a situation in
which the citizen-saboteur acquires a sense of responsibility and begins
to educate others in simple sabotage.

(2) Encouraging Destructiveness

It should be pointed out to the saboteur where the circumstances are
suitable, that he is acting in self-defense against the enemy, or
retaliating against the enemy for other acts of destruction. A
reasonable amount of humor in the presentation of suggestions for simple
sabotage will relax tensions of fear.

(a) The saboteur may have to reverse his thinking, and he should be told
this in so many words. Where he formerly thought of keeping his tools
sharp, he should now let them grow dull; surfaces that formerly were
lubricated now should be sanded; normally diligent, he should now be
lazy and careless; and so on. Once he is encouraged to think backwards
about himself and the objects of his everyday life, the saboteur will
see many opportunities in his immediate environment which cannot
possibly be seen from a distance. A state of mind should be encouraged
that anything can be sabotaged.

(b) Among the potential citizen-saboteurs who are to engage in physical
destruction, two extreme types may be distinguished. On the one hand,
there is the man who is not technically trained and employed. This man
needs specific suggestions as to what he can and should destroy as well
as details regarding the tools by means of which destruction is
accomplished.

(c) At the other extreme is the man who is a technician, such as a lathe
operator or an automobile mechanic. Presumably this man would be able to
devise methods of simple sabotage which would be appropriate to his own
facilities. However, this man needs to be stimulated to re-orient his
thinking in the direction of destruction. Specific examples, which need
not be from his own field, should accomplish this.

(d) Various media may be used to disseminate suggestions and information
regarding simple sabotage. Among the media which may be used, as the
immediate situation dictates, are: freedom stations or radio false
(unreadable) broadcasts or leaflets may be directed toward specific
geographic or occupational areas, or they may be general in
scope. Finally, agents may be trained in the art of simple sabotage, in
anticipation of a time when they may be able to communicate this
information directly.

(3) Safety Measures

(a) The amount of activity carried on by the saboteur will be governed
not only by the number of opportunities he sees, but also by the amount
of danger he feels. Bad news travels fast, and simple sabotage will be
discouraged if too many simple saboteurs are arrested.

(b) It should not be difficult to prepare leaflets and other media for
the saboteur about the choice of weapons, time, and targets which will
insure the saboteur against detection and retaliation. Among such
suggestions might be the following:

(1) Use materials which appear to be innocent. A knife or a nail file
can be carried normally on your person; either is a multi-purpose
instrument for creating damage. Matches, pebbles, hair, salt, nails, and
dozens of other destructive agents can be carried or kept in your living
quarters without exciting any suspicion whatever. If you are a worker in
a particular trade or industry you can easily carry and keep such things
as wrenches, hammers, emery paper, and the like.

(2) Try to commit acts for which large numbers of people could be
responsible. For instance, if you blow out the wiring in a factory at a
central fire box, almost anyone could have done it. On-the-street
sabotage after dark, such as you might be able to carry out against a
military car or truck, is another example of an act for which it would
be impossible to blame you.

(3) Do not be afraid to commit acts for which you might be blamed
directly, so long as you do so rarely, and as long as you have a
plausible excuse: you dropped your wrench across an electric circuit
because an air raid had kept you up the night before and you were
half-dozing at work. Always be profuse in your apologies. Frequently you
can "get away" with such acts under the cover of pretending stupidity,
ignorance, over-caution, fear of being suspected of sabotage, or
weakness and dullness due to undernourishment.

(4) After you have committed an act of easy sabotage, resist any
temptation to wait around and see what happens. Loiterers arouse
suspicion. Of course, there are circumstances when it would be
suspicious for you to leave. If you commit sabotage on your job, you
should naturally stay at your work.

4. TOOLS, TARGETS, AND TIMING

The citizen-saboteur cannot be closely controlled. Nor is it reasonable
to expect that simple sabotage can be precisely concentrated on specific
types of target according to the requirements of a concrete military
situation. Attempts to control simple sabotage according to developing
military factors, moreover, might provide the enemy with intelligence of
more or less value in anticipating the date and area of notably
intensified or notably slackened military activity.

Sabotage suggestions, of course, should be adapted to fit the area where
they are to be practiced. Target priorities for general types of
situations likewise can be specified, for emphasis at the proper time by
the underground press, freedom stations, and cooperating propaganda.

(1) Under General Conditions

(a) Simple sabotage is more than malicious mischief, and it should
always consist of acts whose results will be detrimental to the
materials and manpower of the enemy.

(b) The saboteur should be ingenious in using his every-day equipment.
All sorts of weapons will present themselves if he looks at his
surroundings in a different light. For example, emery dust -- a at first
may seen unobtainable but if the saboteur were to pulverize an emery
knife sharpener or emery wheel with a hammer, he would find himself with
a plentiful supply.

(c) The saboteur should never attack targets beyond his capacity or the
capacity of his instruments. An inexperienced person should not, for
example, attempt to use explosives, but should confine himself to the
use of matches or other familiar weapons.

(d) The saboteur should try to damage only objects and materials known
to be in use by the enemy or to be destined for early use by the
enemy. It will be safe for him to assume that almost any product of
heavy industry is destined for enemy use, and that the most efficient
fuels and lubricants also are destined for enemy use. Without special
knowledge, however, it would be undesirable for him to attempt
destruction of food crops or food products.

(e) Although the citizen-saboteur may rarely have access to military
objects, he should give these preference above all others.

(2) Prior to a Military Offensive During periods which are quiescent in
a military sense, such emphasis as can be given to simple sabotage might
well center on industrial production, to lessen the flow of materials
and equipment to the enemy. Slashing a rubber tire on an Army truck may
be an act of value; spoiling a batch of rubber in the production plant
is an act of still more value.

(3) During a Military Offensive

(a) Most significant sabotage for an area which is, or is soon destined
to be, a theater of combat operations is that whose effects will be
direct and immediate. Even if the effects are relatively minor and
localized, this type of sabotage is to be preferred to activities whose
effects, while widespread, are indirect and delayed.

(1) The saboteur should be encouraged to attack transportation
facilities of all kinds.

Among such facilities are roads, railroads, auto mobiles, trucks,
motor-cycles, bicycles, trains, and trams.

(2) Any communications facilities which can be used by the authorities
to transmit instructions or morale material should be the objects of
simple sabotage. These include telephone, telegraph and power systems,
radio, newspapers, placards, and public notices.

(3) Critical materials, valuable in themselves or necessary to the
efficient functioning of transportation and communication, also should
become targets for the citizen-saboteur. These may include oil,
gasoline, tires, food, and water.

5. SPECIFIC SUGGESTIONS FOR SIMPLE SABOTAGE

It will not be possible to evaluate the desirability of simple sabotage
in an area without having in mind rather specifically what individual
acts and results are embraced by the definition of simple sabotage.

A listing of specific acts follows, classified according to types of
target.  This list is presented as a growing rather than a complete
outline of the methods of simple sabotage. As new techniques are
developed, or new fields explored, it will be elaborated and expanded.

(1) Buildings

Warehouses, barracks, offices, hotels, and factory buildings are
outstanding targets for simple sabotage. They are extremely susceptible
to damage, especially by fire; they offer opportunities to such
untrained people as janitors, charwomen, and casual visitors; and, when
damaged, they present a relatively large handicap to the enemy.

(a) Fires can be started wherever there is an accumulation of
inflammable material. Warehouses are obviously the most promising
targets but incendiary sabotage need not be confined to them alone.

(1) Whenever possible, arrange to have the fire start after you have
gone away. Use a candle and paper, combination, setting it as close as
possible to the inflammable material you want to burn: From a sheet of
paper, tear a strip three or four centimeters wide and wrap it around
the base of the candle two or three times. Twist more sheets of paper
into loose ropes and place them around the base of the candle. When the
candle flame reaches the encircling strip, it will be ignited and in
turn will ignite the surrounding paper. The size, heat, and duration of
the resulting flame will depend on how much paper you use and how much
of it you can cramp in a small space.

(2) With a flame of this kind, do not attempt to ignite any but rather
inflammable materials, such as cotton sacking. To light more resistant
materials, use a candle plus tightly rolled or twisted paper which has
been soaked in gasoline. To create a briefer but even hotter flame, put
celluloid such as you might find in an old comb, into a nest of plain or
saturated paper which is to be fired by a candle.

(3) To make another type of simple fuse, soak one end of a piece of
string in grease. Rub a generous pinch of gunpowder over the inch of
string where greasy string meets clean string. Then ignite the clean end
of the string. It will burn slowly without a flame (in much the same way
that a cigarette burns) until it reaches the grease and gunpowder; it
will then flare up suddenly. The grease-treated string will then burn
with a flame. The same effect may be achieved by using matches instead
of the grease and gunpowder. Run the string over the match heads, taking
care that the string is not pressed or knotted. They too will produce a
sudden flame. The advantage of this type of fuse is that string burns at
a set speed. You can time your fire by the length and thickness of the
string you chose.

(4) Use a fuse such as; the ones suggested above to start a fire in an
office after hours. The destruction of records and other types of
documents would be a serious handicap to the enemy.

(5) In basements where waste is kept, janitors should accumulate oily
and greasy waste. Such waste sometimes ignites spontaneously, but it can
easily be lit with a cigarette or match. If you are a janitor on night
duty, you can be the first to report the fire, but don't report it too
soon.

(6) A clean factory is not susceptible to fire, but a dirty one
is. Workers should be careless with refuse and janitors should be
inefficient in cleaning. If enough dirt and trash can be accumulated an
otherwise fireproof building will become inflammable.

(7) Where illuminating gas is used in a room which is vacant at night,
shut the windows tightly, turn on the gas, and leave a candle burning in
the room, closing the door tightly behind you. After a time, the gas
will explode, and a fire may or may not follow.

(b) Water and miscellaneous

(1) Ruin warehouse stock by setting the automatic sprinkler system to
work. You can do this by tapping the sprinkler heads sharply with a
hammer or by holding a match under them.

(2) Forget to provide paper in toilets; put tightly rolled paper, hair,
and other obstructions in the W. C. Saturate a sponge with a thick
starch or sugar solution. Squeeze it tightly into a ball, wrap it with
string, and dry.  Remove the string when fully dried. The sponge will be
in the form of a tight hard ball. Flush down a

W. C. or otherwise introduce into a sewer line. The sponge will
gradually expand to its normal size and plug the sewage system.

(3) Put a coin beneath a bulb in a public building during the daytime,
so that fuses will blow out when lights are turned on at night. The
fuses themselves may be rendered ineffective by putting a coin behind
them or loading them with heavy wire. Then a short-circuit may either
start a fire, damage transformers, or blow out a central fuse which will
interrupt distribution of electricity to a large area.

(4) Jam paper, bits of wood, hairpins, and anything else that will fit,
into the locks of all unguarded entrances to public buildings.

(2) Industrial Production: Manufacturing

(a) Tools

(1) Let cutting tools grow dull. They will be inefficient, will slow
down production, and may damage the materials and parts you use them on.

(2) Leave saws slightly twisted when you are not using them. After a
while, they will break when used.

(3) Using a very rapid stroke will wear out a file before its time. So
will dragging a file in slow strokes under heavy pressure. Exert
pressure on the backward stroke as well as the forward stroke.

(4) Clean files by knocking them against the vise or the workpiece; they
are easily broken this way.

(5) Bits and drills will snap under heavy pressure.

(6) You can put a press punch out of order by putting in it more
material than it is adjusted for--two blanks instead of one, for example.

(7) Power-driven tools like pneumatic drills, riveters, and so on, are
never efficient when dirty. Lubrication points and electric contacts can
easily be fouled by normal accumulations of dirt or the insertion of
foreign matter.

(b) Oil and lubrication systems are not only vulnerable to easy
sabotage, but are critical in every machine with moving parts. Sabotage
of oil and lubrication will slow production or stop work entirely at
strategic points in industrial processes.

(1) Put metal dust or filings, fine sand, ground glass, emery dust (get
it by pounding up an emery knife sharpener) and similar hard, gritty
substances directly into lubrication systems. They will scour smooth
surfaces, ruining pistons, cylinder walls, shafts, and bearings. They
will overheat and stop motors which will need overhauling, new parts,
and extensive repairs. Such materials, if they are used, should be
introduced into lubrication systems past any filters which otherwise
would strain them out.

(2) You can cause wear on any machine by uncovering a filter system,
poking a pencil or any other sharp object through the filter mesh, then
covering it up again. Or, if you can dispose of it quickly, simply
remove the filter.

(3) If you cannot get at the lubrication system or filter directly, you
may be able to lessen the effectiveness of oil by diluting it in
storage. In this case, almost any liquid will do which will thin the
oil. A small amount of sulphuric acid, varnish, water-glass, or linseed
oil will be especially effective.

(4) Using a thin oil where a heavy oil is prescribed will break down a
machine or heat up a moving shaft so that it will "freeze" and stop.

(5) Put any clogging substance into lubrication systems or, if it will
float, into stored oil. Twisted combings of human hair, pieces of
string, dead insects, and many other common objects will be effective in
stopping or hindering the flow of oil through feed lines and filters.

(6) Under some circumstances, you may be able to destroy oil outright
rather than interfere with its effectiveness, by removing stop-plugs
from lubricating systems or by puncturing the drums and cans in which it
is stored.

(c) Cooling Systems (1.) A water cooling system can be put out of
commission in a fairly short time, with considerable damage to an engine
or motor, if you put into it several pinches of hard grain, such as rice
or wheat. They will swell up and choke the circulation of water, and the
cooling system will have to be torn down to remove the
obstruction. Sawdust or hair may also be used to clog a water cooling
system.

(2) If very cold water is quickly introduced into the cooling system of
an overheated motor, contraction and considerable strain on the engine
housing will result. If you can repeat the treatment a few times,
cracking and serious damage will result.

(3) You can ruin the effectiveness of an air cooling system by plugging
dirt and waste into intake or exhaust valves. If a belt-run fan is used
in the system, make a jagged cut at least half way through the belt; it
will slip and finally part under strain and the motor will overheat.

(d) Gasoline and Oil Fuel Tanks and fueling engines usually are
accessible and easy to open. They afford a very vulnerable target for
simple sabotage activities. (1.) Put several pinches of sawdust or hard
grain, such as rice or wheat, into the fuel tank of a gasoline
engine. The particles will choke a feed line so that the engine will
stop. Some time will be required to discover the source of the
trouble. Although they will be hard to get, crumbs of natural rubber,
such as you might find in old rubber bands and pencil erasers, are also
effective.

(2) If you can accumulate sugar, put it in the fuel tank of a gasoline
engine.  As it burns together with the gasoline, it will turn into a
sticky mess which will completely mire the engine and necessitate
extensive cleaning and repair.  Honey and molasses are as good as
sugar. Try to use about 75-100 grams for each 10 gallons of gasoline.

(3) Other impurities which you can introduce into gasoline will cause
rapid engine wear and eventual breakdown. Fine particles of pumice,
sand, ground glass, and metal dust can easily be introduced into a
gasoline tank. Be sure that the particles are very fine, so that they
will be able to pass through the carburetor jet.

(4) Water, urine, wine, or any other simple liquid you can get in
reasonably large quantities will dilute gasoline fuel to a point where
no combustion will occur in the cylinder and the engine will not
move. One pint to 20 gallons of gasoline is sufficient. If salt water is
used, it will cause corrosion and permanent motor damage.

(5) In the case of Diesel engines, put low flashpoint oil into the fuel
tank; the engine will not move. If there already is proper oil in the
tank when the wrong kind is added, the engine will only limp and sputter
along.

(6) Fuel lines to gasoline and oil engines frequently pass over the
exhaust pipe. When the machine is at rest, you can stab a small hole in
the fuel line and plug the hole with wax. As the engine runs and the
exhaust tube becomes hot, the wax will be melted; fuel will drip onto
the exhaust and a blaze will start.

(7) If you have access to a room where gasoline is stored, remember that
gas vapor accumulating in a closed room will explode after a time if you
leave a candle burning in the room. A good deal of evaporation, however,
must occur from the gasoline tins into the air of the room. If removal
of the tops of the tins does not expose enough gasoline to the air to
ensure copious evaporation, you can open lightly constructed tins
further with a knife, ice pick or sharpened nail file. Or puncture a
tiny hole in the tank which will permit gasoline to leak out on the
floor. This will greatly increase the rate of evaporation. Before you
light your candle, be sure that windows are closed and the room is as
air-tight as you can make it. If you can see that windows in a
neighboring room are opened wide, you have a chance of setting a large
fire which will not only destroy the gasoline but anything else nearby;
when the gasoline explodes, the doors of the storage room will be blown
open, a draft to the neighboring windows will be created which will whip
up a fine conflagration.

(e) Electric Motors Electric motors (including dynamos) are more
restricted than the targets so far discussed. They cannot be sabotaged
easily or without risk of injury by unskilled persons who may otherwise
have good opportunities for destruction.

(1) Set the rheostat to a high point of resistance in all types of
electric motors. They will overheat and catch fire.

(2) Adjust the overload relay to a very high value beyond the capacity
of the motor. Then overload the motor to a point where it will overheat
and break down.

(3) Remember that dust, dirt, and moisture are enemies of electrical
equipment. Spill dust and dirt onto the points where the wires in
electric motors connect with terminals, and onto insulating
parts. Inefficient transmission of current and, in some cases, short
circuits will result. Wet generator motors to produce short circuits.

(4) "Accidentally" bruise the insulation on wire, loosen nuts on
connections, make faulty splices and faulty connections in wiring, to
waste electric current and reduce the power of electric motors, the
power output or cause short circuiting in direct-current motors: Loosen
or remove commutator holding rings. Sprinkle carbon, graphite, or metal
dust on commutators. Put a little grease or oil at the contact points of
commutators. Where commutator bars are close together bridge the gaps
between them with metal dust, or sawtooth their edges with a chisel so
that the teeth on adjoining bars meet or nearly meet and current can
pass from one to the other.

(6) Put a piece of finely grained emery paper half the size of a postage
stamp in a place where it will wear away rotating brushes. The emery
paper and the motor will be destroyed in the resulting fire.

(7) Sprinkle carbon, graphite or metal dust on slip-rings so that the
current will leak or short circuits will occur. When a motor is idle,
nick the slip-rings with a chisel.

(8) Cause motor stoppage or inefficiency by applying dust mixed with
grease to the face of the armature so that it will not make proper
contact.

(9) To overheat electric motors, mix sand with heavy grease and smear it
between the stator and rotor, or wedge thin metal pieces between
them. To prevent the efficient generation of current, put floor
sweepings, oil, tar, or paint between them.

(10) In motors using three-phase current, deeply nick one of the lead-in
wires with a knife or file when the machine is at rest, or replace one
of the three fuses with a blown-out fuse. In the first case, the motor
will stop after running awhile, and in the second, it will not start.

(f) Transformers

(1) Transformers of the oil-filled type can be put out of commission if
you pour water, salt water, machine-tool coolant, or kerosene into the
oil tank.

(2) In air-cooled transformers, block the ventilation by piling debris
around the transformer.

(3) In all types of transformers, throw carbon, graphite or metal dust
over the outside bushings and other exposed electrical parts.

(g) Turbines for the most part are heavily built, stoutly housed, and
difficult of access. Their vulnerability to simple sabotage is very low.

(1) After inspecting or repairing a hydro turbine, fasten the cover
insecurely so that it will blow off and flood the plant with water. A
loose cover on a steam turbine will cause it to leak and slow down.

(2) In water turbines, insert a large piece of scrap iron in the head of
the penstock, just beyond the screening, so that water will carry the
damaging material down to the plant equipment.

(3) When the steam line to a turbine is opened for repair, put pieces of
scrap iron into it, to be blasted into the turbine machinery when steam
is up again.

(4) Create a leak in the line feeding oil to the turbine, so that oil
will fall on the hot steam pipe and cause a fire.

(h) Boilers

(1) Reduce the efficiency of steam boilers any way you can. Put too much
water in them to make them slow-starting, or keep the fire under them
low to keep them inefficient. Let them dry and turn the fire up; they
will crack and be ruined. An especially good trick is to keep putting
limestone or water containing lime in the boiler; it will deposit lime
on the bottom and sides. This deposit will provide very good insulation
against heat; after enough of it has collected, the boiler will be
completely worthless.

(3) Production. Metals

(a) Iron and Steel

(1) Keep blast furnaces in a condition where they must be frequently
shut down for repair. In making fire-proof bricks for the inner lining
of blast furnaces, put in an extra proportion of tar so that they will
wear out quickly and necessitate constant re-lining.

(2) Make cores for casting so that they are filled with air bubbles and
an imperfect cast results.

(3) See that the core in a mold is not properly supported, so that the
core gives way or the casting is spoiled because of the incorrect
position of the core.

(4) In tempering steel or iron, apply too much heat, so that the
resulting bars and ingots are of poor quality.

(b) Other Metals

No suggestions available.

(4) Production: Mining and Mineral Extraction

(a) Coal

(1) A slight blow against your Davy oil lamp will extinguish it, and to
light it again you will have to find a place where there is no fire
damp.  Take a long time looking for the place.

(2) Blacksmiths who make pneumatic picks should not harden them
properly, so that they will quickly grow dull.

(3) You can easily put your pneumatic pick out of order. Pour a small
amount of water through the oil lever and your pick will stop working.
Coal dust and improper lubrication will also put it out of order.

(4) Weaken the chain that pulls the bucket conveyers carrying coal. A
deep dent in the chain made with blows of a pick or shovel will cause it
to part under normal strain. Once a chain breaks, normally or otherwise
take your time about reporting the damage; be slow about taking the
chain up for repairs and bringing it back down after repairs.

(5) Derail mine cars by putting obstructions on the rails and in switch
points. If possible, pick a gallery where coal cars have to pass each
other, so that traffic will be snarled up.

(6) Send up quantities of rock and other useless material with the coal.

(5) Production: Agriculture

(a) Machinery

(1) See par. 5 b. (2) (c), (d), (e).

(b) Crops and livestock probably will be destroyed only in areas where
there are large food surpluses or where the enemy (regime) is known to
be requisitioning food.

(1.) Feed crops to livestock. Let crops harvest too early or too late.
Spoil stores of grain, fruit and vegetables by soaking them in water so
that they will rot. Spoil fruit and vegetables by leaving them in the
sun.

(6) Transportation: Railways

(a) Passengers

(1.) Make train travel as inconvenient as possible for enemy personnel.
Make mistakes in issuing train tickets, leaving portions of the journey
uncovered by the ticket book; issue two tickets for the same seat in the
train, so that an interesting argument will result; near train time,
instead of issuing printed tickets write them out slowly by hand,
prolonging the process until the train is nearly ready to leave or has
left the station.  On station bulletin boards announcing train arrivals
and departures, see that false and misleading information is given about
trains bound for enemy destinations.

(2) In trains bound for enemy destinations, attendants should make life
as uncomfortable as possible for passengers. See that the food is
especially bad, take up tickets after midnight, call all station stops
very loudly during the night, handle baggage as noisily as possible
during the night, and so on.

(3) See that the luggage of enemy personnel is mislaid or unloaded at
the wrong stations.

Switch address labels on enemy baggage.

(4) Engineers should see that trains run slow or make unscheduled stops
for plausible reasons.

(b) Switches, Signals and Routing

(1) Exchange wires in switchboards containing signals and switches, so
that they connect to the wrong terminals.

(2) Loosen push-rods so that signal arms do not work; break signal
lights; exchange the colored lenses on red and green lights.

(3) Spread and spike switch points in the track so that they will not
move, or place rocks or close-packed dirt between the switch points.

(4) Sprinkle rock salt or ordinary salt profusely over the electrical
connections of switch points and on the ground nearby. When it rains,
the switch will be short-circuited.

(5) See that cars are put on the wrong trains. Remove the labels from
cars needing repair and put them on cars in good order. Leave couplings
between cars as loose as possible.

(c) Road-beds and Open Track

(1) On a curve, take the bolts out of the tie-plates connecting to
sections of the outside rail, and scoop away the gravel, cinders, or
dirt for a few feet on each side of the connecting joint.

(2) If by disconnecting the tie-plate at a joint and loosening sleeper
nails on each side of the joint, it becomes possible to move a sections
of rail, spread two sections of rail and drive a spike vertically
between them.

(d) Oil and Lubrication

(1) See 5 b. (2) (b).

(2) Squeeze lubricating pipes with pincers or dent them with hammers, so
that the flow of oil is obstructed.

(e) Cooling Systems

(1) See 5 b (2) (c).

(f) Gasoline and Oil Fuel

(1) See 5 b (2) (d).

(g) Electric Motors

(1) See 5 b (2) (e) and (f).

(h) Boilers

(1) See 5 b (2) (h).

(2) After inspection put heavy oil or tar in the engines' boilers, or
put half a kilogram of soft soap into the water in the tender.

(i) Brakes and Miscellaneous

(1) Engines should run at high speeds and use brakes excessively at
curves and on downhill grades.

(2) Punch holes in air-brake valves or water supply pipes.

(3) In the last car of a passenger train or or a front car of a freight,
remove the wadding from a journal box and replace it with oily rags.

(7) Transportation: Automotive

(a) Roads. Damage to roads [(3) below] is slow, and therefore
impractical as a D-day or near D-day activity.

(1) Change sign posts at intersections and forks; the enemy will go the
wrong way and it may be miles before he discovers his mistakes.

In areas where traffic is composed primarily of enemy autos, trucks, and
motor convoys of various kinds remove danger signals from curves and
intersections.

(2) When the enemy asks for directions, give him wrong information.
Especially when enemy convoys are in the neighborhood, truck drivers can
spread rumors and give false information about bridges being out,
ferries closed, and detours lying ahead.

(3) If you can start damage to a heavily traveled road, passing traffic
and the elements will do the rest. Construction gangs can see that too
much sand or water is put in concrete or that the road foundation has
soft spots. Anyone can scoop ruts in asphalt and macadam roads which
turn soft in hot weather; passing trucks will accentuate the ruts to a
point where substantial repair will be needed. Dirt roads also can be
scooped out. If you are a road laborer, it will be only a few minutes
work to divert a small stream from a sluice so that it runs over and
eats away the road.

(4) Distribute broken glass, nails, and sharp rocks on roads to puncture
tires.

(b) Passengers

(1) Bus-driver can go past the stop where the enemy wants to get off.
Taxi drivers can waste the enemy's time and make extra money by driving
the longest possible route to his destination.

(c) Oil and Lubrication

(1) See 5 b. (2) (b).

(2) Disconnect the oil pump; this will burn out the main bearings in
less than 50 miles of normal driving.

(d) Radiator

(1) See 5 b. (2) (c).

(e) Fuel

(1) See 5 b. (2) (d).

(f) Battery and Ignition

(1) Jam bits of wood into the ignition lock; loosen or exchange
connections behind the switchboard; put dirt in spark plugs; damage
distributor points.

(2) Turn on the lights in parked cars so that the battery will run down.

(3) Mechanics can ruin batteries in a number of undetectable ways: Take
the valve cap off a cell, and drive a screw driver slantwise into the
exposed water vent, shattering the plates of the cell; no damage will
show when you put the cap back on. Iron or copper filings put into the
cells i.e., dropped into the acid, will greatly shorten its life. Copper
coins or a few pieces of iron will accomplish the same and more slowly.

One hundred to 150 cubic centimeters of vinegar in each cell greatly
reduces the life of the battery, but the odor of the vinegar may reveal
what has happened.

(g) Gears

(1) Remove the lubricant from or put too light a lubricant in the
transmission and other gears.

(2) In trucks, tractors, and other machines with heavy gears, fix the
gear case insecurely, putting bolts in only half the bolt holes. The
gears will be badly jolted in use and will soon need repairs.

(h) Tires

(1) Slash or puncture tires of unguarded vehicles. Put a nail inside a
match box or other small box, and set it vertically in front of the back
tire of a stationary car; when the car starts off, the nail will go
neatly through the tire.

(2) It is easy to damage a tire in a tire repair shop: In fixing flats,
spill glass, benzine, caustic soda, or other material inside the casing
which will puncture or corrode the tube. If you put a gummy substance
inside the tube, the next flat will stick the tube to the casing and
make it unusable. Or, when you fix a flat tire, you can simply leave
between the tube and the casing the object which caused the flat in the
first place.

(3) In assembling a tire after repair, pump the tube up as fast as you
can. Instead of filling out smoothly, it may crease, in which case it
will wear out quickly. Or, as you put a tire together, see if you can
pinch the tube between the rim of the tire and the rim of the wheel, so
that a blow-out will result.

(4) In putting air into tires, see that they are kept below normal
pressure, so that more than an ordinary amount of wear will result. In
filling tires on double wheels, inflate the inner tire to a much higher
pressure than the outer one; both will wear out more quickly this way.
Badly aligned wheels also wear tires out quickly; you can leave wheels
out of alignment when they come in for adjustment, or you can spring
them out of true with a strong kick, or by driving the car slowly and
diagonally into a curb.

(5) If you have access to stocks of tires, you can rot them by spilling
oil, gasoline, caustic acid, or benzine on them. Synthetic rubber,
however, is less susceptible to these chemicals.

(8) Transportation: Water

(a) Navigation

(1) Barge and river boat personnel should spread false rumors about the
navigability and conditions of the waterways they travel. Tell other
barge and boat captains to follow channels that will take extra time, or
cause them to make canal detours.

(2) Barge and river boat captains should navigate with exceeding caution
near locks and bridges, to waste their time and to waste the time of
other craft which may have to wait on them. If you don't pump the bilges
of ships and barges often enough, they will be slower and harder to
navigate. Barges "accidentally" run aground are an efficient time waster
too.

(3) Attendants on swing, draw, or bascule bridges can delay traffic over
the bridge or in the waterway underneath by being slow. Boat captains
can leave unattended draw bridges open in order to hold up road traffic.

(4) Add or subtract compensating magnets to the compass on cargo
ships. Demagnetize the compass or maladjust it by concealing a large bar
of steel or iron near to it.

(b) Cargo

(1) While loading or unloading, handle cargo carelessly in order to
cause damage. Arrange the cargo so that the weakest and lightest crates
and boxes will be at the bottom of the hold, while the heaviest ones are
on top of them.

Put hatch covers and tarpaulins on sloppily, so that rain and deck wash
will injure the cargo.

Tie float valves open so that storage tanks will overflow on perishable
goods.

(9) Communications

(a) Telephone

(1) At office, hotel and exchange switch boards delay putting enemy
calls through, give them wrong numbers, cut them off "accidentally," or
forget to disconnect them so that the line cannot be used again.

(2) Hamper official and especially military business by making at least
one telephone call a day to an enemy headquarters; when you get them,
tell them you have the wrong number.

Call military or police offices and make anonymous false reports of
fires, air raids, bombs.

(3) In offices and buildings used by the enemy, unscrew the earphone of
telephone receivers and remove the diaphragm. Electricians and telephone
repair men can make poor connections and damage insulation so that cross
talk and other kinds of electrical interference will make conversations
hard or impossible to understand.

(4) Put the batteries under automatic switchboards out of commission by
dropping nails, metal filings, or coins into the cells. If you can treat
half the batteries in this way, the switchboard will stop working. A
whole telephone system can be disrupted if you can put 10 percent of the
cells in half the batteries of the central battery room out of order.

(b) Telegraph

(1) Delay the transmission and delivery of telegrams to enemy
destinations.

(2) Garble telegrams to enemy destinations so that another telegram will
have to be sent or a long distance call will have to be made. Sometimes
it will be possible to do this by changing a single letter in a word
-- for example, changing "minimum" to "maximum," so that the person
receiving the telegram will not know whether "minimum" or "maximum" is
meant.

(c) Transportation Lines

(1) Cut telephone and telegraph transmission lines. Damage insulation on
power lines to cause interference.

(d) Mail

(1) Post office employees can see to it that enemy mail is always
delayed by one day or more, that it is put in wrong sacks, and so on.

(e) Motion Pictures

(1) Projector operators can ruin newsreels and other enemy propaganda
films by bad focusing, speeding up or slowing down the film and by
causing frequent breakage in the film.

(2) Audiences can ruin enemy propaganda films by applauding to drown the
words of the speaker, by coughing loudly, and by talking.

(3) Anyone can break up a showing of an enemy propaganda film by putting
two or three dozen large moths in a paper bag. Take the bag to the
movies with you, put it on the floor in an empty section of the theater
as you go in and leave it open. The moths will fly out and climb into
the projector beam, so that the film will be obscured by fluttering
shadows.

(f) Radio

(1) Station engineers will find it quite easy to overmodulate
transmissions of talks by persons giving enemy propaganda or
instructions, so that they will sound as if they were talking through a
heavy cotton blanket with a mouth full of marbles.

(2) In your own apartment building, you can interfere with radio
reception at times when the enemy wants everybody to listen. Take an
electric light plug off the end of an electric light cord; take some
wire out of the cord and tie it across two terminals of a two-prong plug
or three terminals of a four-prong plug. Then take it around and put it
into as many wall and floor outlets as you can find. Each time you
insert the plug into a new circuit, you will blow out a fuse and silence
all radios running on power from that circuit until a new fuse is put
in.

(3) Damaging insulation on any electrical equipment tends to create
radio interference in the immediate neighborhood, particularly on large
generators, neon signs, fluorescent lighting, X-ray machines, and power
lines. If workmen can damage insulation on a high tension line near an
enemy airfield, they will make ground-to-plane radio communications
difficult and perhaps impossible during long periods of the day.

(10) Electric Power

(a) Turbines, Electric Motors, Transformers

(1) See 5 b. (2) (e), (f),and (g).

(b) Transmission Lines

(1.) Linesmen can loosen and dirty insulators to cause power leakage.
It will be quite easy, too, for them to tie a piece of very heavy string
several times back and forth between two parallel transmission lines,
winding it several turns around the wire each time. Beforehand, the
string should be heavily saturated with salt and then dried. When it
rains, the string becomes a conductor, and a short-circuit will result.

(11) General Interference with Organizations and Production

(a) Organizations and Conferences (1) Insist on doing everything through
"channels." Never permit short-cuts to be taken in order to expedite
decisions.

(2) Make "speeches." Talk as frequently as possible and at great
length. Illustrate your "points" by long anecdotes and accounts of
personal experiences. Never hesitate to make a few appropriate
"patriotic" comments.

(3) When possible, refer all matters to committees, for "further study
and consideration." Attempt to make the committees as large as possible
-- never less than five.

(4) Bring up irrelevant issues as frequently as possible.

(5) Haggle over precise wordings of communications, minutes,
resolutions.

(6) Refer back to matters decided upon at the last meeting and attempt
to re-open the question of the advisability of that decision.

(7) Advocate "caution." Be "reasonable" and urge your fellow-conferees
to be "reasonable" and avoid haste which might result in embarrassments
or difficulties later on.

(8) Be worried about the propriety of any decision -- raise the
question of whether such action as is contemplated lies within the
jurisdiction of the group or whether it might conflict with the policy
of some higher echelon.

(b) Managers and Supervisors

(1) Demand written orders.

(2) "Misunderstand" orders. Ask endless questions or engage in long
correspondence about such orders. Quibble over them when you can.

(3) Do everything possible to delay the delivery of orders. Even though
parts of an order may be ready beforehand, don't deliver it until it is
completely ready.

(4) Don't order new working materials until your current stocks have
been virtually exhausted, so that the slightest delay in filling your
order will mean a shutdown.

(5) Order high-quality materials which are hard to get. If you don't get
them argue about it. Warn that inferior materials will mean inferior
work.

(6) In making work assignments, always sign out the unimportant jobs
first. See that the important jobs are assigned to inefficient workers
of poor machines.

(7) Insist on perfect work in relatively unimportant products; send
back for refinishing those which have the least flaw. Approve other
defective parts whose flaws are not visible to the naked eye.

(8) Make mistakes in routing so that parts and materials will be sent to
the wrong place in the plant.

(9) When training new workers, give incomplete or misleading
instructions.

(10) To lower morale and with it, production, be pleasant to inefficient
workers; give them undeserved promotions. Discriminate against efficient
workers; complain unjustly about their work.

(11) Hold conferences when there is more critical work to be done.

(12) Multiply paper work in plausible ways.

Start duplicate files.

(13) Multiply the procedures and clearances involved in issuing
instructions, pay checks, and so on. See that three people have to
approve everything where one would do.

(14) Apply all regulations to the last letter.

(c) Office Workers

(1) Make mistakes in quantities of material when you are copying
orders. Confuse similar names. Use wrong addresses.

(2) Prolong correspondence with government bureaus.

(3) Misfile essential documents.

(4) In making carbon copies, make one too few, so that an extra copying
job will have to be done.

(5) Tell important callers the boss is busy or talking on another
telephone.

(6) Hold up mail until the next collection.

(7) Spread disturbing rumors that sound like inside dope.

(d) Employees

(1) Work slowly. Think out ways to increase the number of movements
necessary on your job: use a light hammer instead of a heavy one, try to
make a small wrench do when a big one is necessary, use little force
where considerable force is needed, and so on.

(2) Contrive as many interruptions to your work as you can: when
changing the material on which you are working, as you would on a lathe
or punch, take needless time to do it. If you are cutting, shaping or
doing other measured work, measure dimensions twice as often as you need
to. When you go to the lavatory, spend a longer time there than is
necessary.

Forget tools so that you will have to go back after them.

 (3) Even if you understand the language, pretend not to understand
instructions in a foreign tongue.

(4) Pretend that instructions are hard to understand, and ask to have
them repeated more than once. Or pretend that you are particularly
anxious to do your work, and pester the foreman with unnecessary
questions.

(5) Do your work poorly and blame it on bad tools, machinery, or
equipment. Complain that these things are preventing you from doing your
job right.

(6) Never pass on your skill and experience to a new or less skillful
worker.

(7) Snarl up administration in every possible way. Fill out forms
illegibly so that they will have to be done over; make mistakes or omit
requested information in forms.

(8) If possible, join or help organize a group for presenting employee
problems to the management. See that the procedures adopted are as
inconvenient as possible for the management, involving the presence of a
large number of employees at each presentation, entailing more than one
meeting for each grievance, bringing up problems which are largely
imaginary, and so on.

(9) Misroute materials.

(10) Mix good parts with unusable scrap and rejected parts.

(12) General Devices for Lowering Morale and Creating Confusion

(a) Give lengthy and incomprehensible explanations when questioned.

(b) Report imaginary spies or danger to the Gestapo or police.

(c) Act stupid.

(d) Be as irritable and quarrelsome as possible without getting yourself
into trouble.

(e) Misunderstand all sorts of regulations concerning such matters as
rationing, transportation, traffic regulations.

(f) Complain against ersatz materials.

(g) In public treat axis nationals or quislings coldly.

(h) Stop all conversation when axis nationals or quislings enter a
cafe.

(i) Cry and sob hysterically at every occasion, especially when
confronted by government clerks.

(j) Boycott all movies, entertainments, concerts, newspapers which are
in any way connected with the quisling authorities.

(k) Do not cooperate in salvage schemes.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIMPLE SABOTAGE FIELD MANUAL***


******* This file should be named 26184-8.txt or 26184-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/1/8/26184



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
